---
layout: post
title:  "On Christmas in culture"
date:   2018-12-11 08:19:33
categories:
---

Christmas is a holiday that has transcended its christian beginnings and become an American holiday. My mother, who was raised in a secular jewish household in the 50s and 60s, celebrated Christmas because it was "what everyone else did." Christmas has many traditions, and with those traditions and ubiquity, has carved out an indelible place in popular culture. "Chestnuts roasting by the open fire" evokes a warmth sui generis. (TODO: edit that last sentence)  "All I want for Christmas is you " conveys an idealized yet empty capital-L Love as well as any other song could. The Christmas described in popular culture is an idea of a holiday, and idea of world that has left reality long, long ago. There are a few exceptions to this, a few pieces of art that manage to describe a world on December 25th, not this empty ideal.

When you think of art, big-budget action movies aren't the first thing that comes to mind. However, the original _Die Hard_ is a film which breaks out of the Christmas movie mold in a profound way. Many people don't even remember this movie was set on Christmas Day, since Christmas takes a backseat to the chaos that ensues at Nakatomi Plaza. However this is my Christmas experience - you see your family, you might get a day or two off of work, but your life doesn't change in any way. Maybe it's not Alan Rickman threatening your wife and kids, but we all have an Alan Rickman in our lives, whether a demanding boss or a strained relationship. I think one of the things that allows _Die Hard_ to hold up in a way that most 80s action movies haven't is that it is inherently character driven film. Now, that one character is John McClane and everyone else serves to merely give McClane something to react to. However, aren't we all the McClane in our own lives?  (TODO: Add the foster wallace quote about self centeredness)

George Michael, who I was first introduced to when he was vilified in the media after his arrest in 1997 (TODO: check date). Soon after bought Limp Bizkit's _Dookie_, and my favorite song on it was their cover of "Faith." Once I learned that it was a cover, probably about 2 years later, I checked out George Michael and WHAM! and "Last Christmas" caught my ear. Now, catchy heartbreak pop songs are one in a million, but this was a terrific example of one. Over the next decade or so I began to cherish the moments that, amidst the saccharine sentimentality of the standard Christmas music that started each year without failure the day after Thanksgiving, "Last Christmas" would come on. Unlike the traditional take on Christmas love, where you fall in love or propose in a one horse open sleigh, it allowed for a less than perfect holiday.
